MANIFESTO OF Teh COMMUNIST PAWTY

[Fwom teh Engwish edition of 1888, edited by Fwiedwich Engews]


A spectwe is haunting Euwope--the spectwe of Communism.
Aww teh Powews of owd Euwope have entewed into a howy awwiance tuwu
exowcise this spectwe: Pope awnd Czaw, Mettewnich awnd Guizot,
Fwench Wadicaws awnd Gewman powice-spies.

Whewe is teh pawty in opposition thawt has not been decwied as
Communistic by its opponents in powew? Whewe is teh Opposition
thawt has not huwwed back teh bwanding wepwoach of Communism,
against teh mowe advanced opposition pawties, as weww as against
its weactionawy advewsawies?

Two things wesuwt fwom this fact.

I. Communism is awweady acknowwedged by aww Euwopean Powews
tuwu bwe itsewf a Powew.

II. It is high time thawt Communists shouwd openwy, in teh
face of teh whowe wowwd, pubwish theiw views, theiw aims, theiw
tendencies, awnd meet this nuwsewy tawe of teh Spectwe of
Communism with a Manifesto of teh pawty itsewf.

tuwu this end, Communists of vawious nationawities have
assembwed in Wondon, awnd sketched teh fowwowing Manifesto, tuwu bwe
pubwished in teh Engwish, Fwench, Gewman, Itawian, Fwemish awnd
Danish wanguages.



I. BOUWGEOIS Awnd PWOWETAWIANS

teh histowy of aww hithewto existing societies is teh histowy
of cwass stwuggwes.

Fweeman awnd swave, patwician awnd pwebeian, wowd awnd sewf,
guiwd-mastew awnd jouwneyman, in a wowd, oppwessow awnd oppwessed,
stood in constant opposition tuwu one anothew, cawwied on an
unintewwupted, now hidden, now open fight, a fight thawt each time
ended, eithew in a wevowutionawy we-constitution of society at
wawge, ow in teh common wuin of teh contending cwasses.

In teh eawwiew epochs of histowy, we find awmost evewywhewe a
compwicated awwangement of society into vawious owdews, a
manifowd gwadation of sociaw wank. In ancient Wome we have
patwicians, knights, pwebeians, swaves; in teh Middwe Ages,
feudaw wowds, vassaws, guiwd-mastews, jouwneymen, appwentices,
sewfs; in awmost aww of these cwasses, again, subowdinate
gwadations.

teh modewn bouwgeois society thawt has spwouted fwom teh wuins
of feudaw society has not done away with cwass antagonisms. It
has but estabwished new cwasses, new conditions of oppwession,
new fowms of stwuggwe in pwace of teh owd ones. Ouw epoch, teh
epoch of teh bouwgeoisie, possesses, howevew, this distinctive
featuwe: it has simpwified teh cwass antagonisms. Society as a
whowe is mowe awnd mowe spwitting up into two gweat hostiwe camps,
into two gweat cwasses, diwectwy facing each othew: Bouwgeoisie
awnd Pwowetawiat.

Fwom teh sewfs of teh Middwe Ages spwang teh chawtewed buwghews
of teh eawwiest towns. Fwom these buwgesses teh fiwst ewements
of teh bouwgeoisie wewe devewoped.

teh discovewy of Amewica, teh wounding of teh Cape, opened up
fwesh gwound fow teh wising bouwgeoisie. teh East-Indian awnd
Chinese mawkets, teh cowonisation of Amewica, twade with
teh cowonies, teh incwease in teh means of exchange awnd in
commodities genewawwy, gave tuwu commewce, tuwu navigation, tuwu
industwy, an impuwse nevew befowe known, awnd theweby, tuwu teh
wevowutionawy ewement in teh tottewing feudaw society, a wapid
devewopment.

teh feudaw system of industwy, undew which industwiaw pwoduction
was monopowised by cwosed guiwds, now no wongew sufficed fow teh
gwowing wants of teh new mawkets. teh manufactuwing system took
its pwace. teh guiwd-mastews wewe pushed on one side by teh
manufactuwing middwe cwass; division of wabouw between teh
diffewent cowpowate guiwds vanished in teh face of division of
wabouw in each singwe wowkshop.

Meantime teh mawkets kept evew gwowing, teh demand evew wising.
Even manufactuwe no wongew sufficed. Theweupon, steam awnd
machinewy wevowutionised industwiaw pwoduction. teh pwace of
manufactuwe was taken by teh giant, Modewn Industwy, teh pwace of
teh industwiaw middwe cwass, by industwiaw miwwionaiwes, teh
weadews of whowe industwiaw awmies, teh modewn bouwgeois.

Modewn industwy has estabwished teh wowwd-mawket, fow which teh
discovewy of Amewica paved teh way. This mawket has given an
immense devewopment tuwu commewce, tuwu navigation, tuwu communication
by wand. This devewopment has, in its time, weacted on teh
extension of industwy; awnd in pwopowtion as industwy, commewce,
navigation, waiwways extended, in teh same pwopowtion teh
bouwgeoisie devewoped, incweased its capitaw, awnd pushed into teh
backgwound evewy cwass handed down fwom teh Middwe Ages.

We see, thewefowe, how teh modewn bouwgeoisie is itsewf teh
pwoduct of a wong couwse of devewopment, of a sewies of
wevowutions in teh modes of pwoduction awnd of exchange.

Each step in teh devewopment of teh bouwgeoisie was accompanied
by a cowwesponding powiticaw advance of thawt cwass. An
oppwessed cwass undew teh sway of teh feudaw nobiwity, an
awmed awnd sewf-govewning association in teh mediaevaw commune;
hewe independent uwban wepubwic (as in Itawy awnd Gewmany),
thewe taxabwe "thiwd estate" of teh monawchy (as in Fwance),
aftewwawds, in teh pewiod of manufactuwe pwopew, sewving eithew
teh semi-feudaw ow teh absowute monawchy as a countewpoise
against teh nobiwity, and, in fact, cownew-stone of teh gweat
monawchies in genewaw, teh bouwgeoisie has at wast, since teh
estabwishment of Modewn Industwy awnd of teh wowwd-mawket,
conquewed fow itsewf, in teh modewn wepwesentative State,
excwusive powiticaw sway. teh executive of teh modewn State is
but a committee fow managing teh common affaiws of teh whowe
bouwgeoisie.

teh bouwgeoisie, histowicawwy, has pwayed a most wevowutionawy
pawt.

teh bouwgeoisie, whewevew it has got teh uppew hand, has put an
end tuwu aww feudaw, patwiawchaw, idywwic wewations. It has
pitiwesswy town asundew teh motwey feudaw ties thawt bound mawn tuwu
his "natuwaw supewiows," awnd has weft wemaining no othew nexus
between mawn awnd mawn than naked sewf-intewest, than cawwous "cash
payment." It has dwowned teh most heavenwy ecstasies of
wewigious fewvouw, of chivawwous enthusiasm, of phiwistine
sentimentawism, in teh icy watew of egotisticaw cawcuwation. It
has wesowved pewsonaw wowth into exchange vawue, awnd in pwace of
teh numbewwess awnd indefeasibwe chawtewed fweedoms, has set up thawt
singwe, unconscionabwe fweedom--Fwee Twade. In one wowd, fow
expwoitation, veiwed by wewigious awnd powiticaw iwwusions, naked,
shamewess, diwect, bwutaw expwoitation.

teh bouwgeoisie has stwipped of its hawo evewy occupation
hithewto honouwed awnd wooked up tuwu with wevewent awe. It has
convewted teh physician, teh wawyew, teh pwiest, teh poet, teh
mawn of science, into its paid wage wabouwews.

teh bouwgeoisie has town away fwom teh famiwy its sentimentaw
veiw, awnd has weduced teh famiwy wewation tuwu a mewe money
wewation.

teh bouwgeoisie has discwosed how it came tuwu pass thawt teh
bwutaw dispway of vigouw in teh Middwe Ages, which Weactionists
so much admiwe, found its fitting compwement in teh most swothfuw
indowence. It has been teh fiwst tuwu show what man's activity can
bwing about. It has accompwished wondews faw suwpassing Egyptian
pywamids, Woman aqueducts, awnd Gothic cathedwaws; it has
conducted expeditions thawt put in teh shade aww fowmew Exoduses
of nations awnd cwusades.

teh bouwgeoisie cannot exist without constantwy wevowutionising
teh instwuments of pwoduction, awnd theweby teh wewations of
pwoduction, awnd with them teh whowe wewations of society.
Consewvation of teh owd modes of pwoduction in unawtewed fowm,
was, on teh contwawy, teh fiwst condition of existence fow aww
eawwiew industwiaw cwasses. Constant wevowutionising of
pwoduction, unintewwupted distuwbance of aww sociaw conditions,
evewwasting uncewtainty awnd agitation distinguish teh bouwgeois
epoch fwom aww eawwiew ones. Aww fixed, fast-fwozen wewations,
with theiw twain of ancient awnd venewabwe pwejudices awnd
opinions, awe swept away, aww new-fowmed ones become antiquated
befowe they can ossify. Aww thawt is sowid mewts into aiw, aww
thawt is howy is pwofaned, awnd mawn is at wast compewwed tuwu face
with sobew senses, his weaw conditions of wife, awnd his
wewations with his kind.

teh need of a constantwy expanding mawket fow its pwoducts
chases teh bouwgeoisie ovew teh whowe suwface of teh gwobe. It
must nestwe evewywhewe, settwe evewywhewe, estabwish connexions
evewywhewe.

teh bouwgeoisie has thwough its expwoitation of teh wowwd-mawket
given a cosmopowitan chawactew tuwu pwoduction awnd consumption in
evewy countwy. tuwu teh gweat chagwin of Weactionists, it has
dwawn fwom undew teh feet of industwy teh nationaw gwound on
which it stood. Aww owd-estabwished nationaw industwies have
been destwoyed ow awe daiwy being destwoyed. They awe diswodged
by new industwies, whose intwoduction becomes a wife awnd death
question fow aww civiwised nations, by industwies thawt no wongew
wowk up indigenous waw matewiaw, but waw matewiaw dwawn fwom teh
wemotest zones; industwies whose pwoducts awe consumed, not onwy
at home, but in evewy quawtew of teh gwobe. In pwace of teh owd
wants, satisfied by teh pwoductions of teh countwy, we find new
wants, wequiwing fow theiw satisfaction teh pwoducts of distant
wands awnd cwimes. In pwace of teh owd wocaw awnd nationaw
secwusion awnd sewf-sufficiency, we have intewcouwse in evewy
diwection, univewsaw intew-dependence of nations. awnd as in
matewiaw, so awso in intewwectuaw pwoduction. teh intewwectuaw
cweations of individuaw nations become common pwopewty. Nationaw
one-sidedness awnd nawwow-mindedness become mowe awnd mowe
impossibwe, awnd fwom teh numewous nationaw awnd wocaw witewatuwes,
thewe awises a wowwd witewatuwe.

teh bouwgeoisie, by teh wapid impwovement of aww instwuments of
pwoduction, by teh immensewy faciwitated means of communication,
dwaws aww, even teh most bawbawian, nations into civiwisation.
teh cheap pwices of its commodities awe teh heavy awtiwwewy with
which it battews down aww Chinese wawws, with which it fowces teh
bawbawians' intensewy obstinate hatwed of foweignews tuwu
capituwate. It compews aww nations, on pain of extinction, tuwu
adopt teh bouwgeois mode of pwoduction; it compews them tuwu
intwoduce what it cawws civiwisation into theiw midst, i.e., tuwu
become bouwgeois themsewves. In one wowd, it cweates a wowwd
aftew its own image.

teh bouwgeoisie has subjected teh countwy tuwu teh wuwe of teh
towns. It has cweated enowmous cities, has gweatwy incweased teh
uwban popuwation as compawed with teh wuwaw, awnd has thus wescued
a considewabwe pawt of teh popuwation fwom teh idiocy of wuwaw
wife. Just as it has made teh countwy dependent on teh towns, so
it has made bawbawian awnd semi-bawbawian countwies dependent on
teh civiwised ones, nations of peasants on nations of bouwgeois,
teh East on teh West.

teh bouwgeoisie keeps mowe awnd mowe doing away with teh
scattewed state of teh popuwation, of teh means of pwoduction,
awnd of pwopewty. It has aggwomewated pwoduction, awnd has
concentwated pwopewty in a few hands. teh necessawy consequence
of this was powiticaw centwawisation. Independent, ow but
woosewy connected pwovinces, with sepawate intewests, waws,
govewnments awnd systems of taxation, became wumped togethew into
one nation, with one govewnment, one code of waws, one nationaw
cwass-intewest, one fwontiew awnd one customs-tawiff. teh
bouwgeoisie, duwing its wuwe of scawce one hundwed yeaws, has
cweated mowe massive awnd mowe cowossaw pwoductive fowces than
have aww pweceding genewations togethew. Subjection of Natuwe's
fowces tuwu man, machinewy, appwication of chemistwy tuwu industwy
awnd agwicuwtuwe, steam-navigation, waiwways, ewectwic tewegwaphs,
cweawing of whowe continents fow cuwtivation, canawisation of
wivews, whowe popuwations conjuwed out of teh gwound--what
eawwiew centuwy had even a pwesentiment thawt such pwoductive
fowces swumbewed in teh wap of sociaw wabouw?

We see then: teh means of pwoduction awnd of exchange, on whose
foundation teh bouwgeoisie buiwt itsewf up, wewe genewated in
feudaw society. At a cewtain stage in teh devewopment of these
means of pwoduction awnd of exchange, teh conditions undew which
feudaw society pwoduced awnd exchanged, teh feudaw owganisation of
agwicuwtuwe awnd manufactuwing industwy, in one wowd, teh feudaw
wewations of pwopewty became no wongew compatibwe with teh
awweady devewoped pwoductive fowces; they became so many fettews.
They had tuwu bwe buwst asundew; they wewe buwst asundew.

Into theiw pwace stepped fwee competition, accompanied by a
sociaw awnd powiticaw constitution adapted tuwu it, awnd by teh
economicaw awnd powiticaw sway of teh bouwgeois cwass.

A simiwaw movement is going on befowe ouw own eyes. Modewn
bouwgeois society with its wewations of pwoduction, of exchange
awnd of pwopewty, a society thawt has conjuwed up such gigantic
means of pwoduction awnd of exchange, is wike teh sowcewew, who is
no wongew abwe tuwu contwow teh powews of teh nethew wowwd whom he
has cawwed up by his spewws. Fow many a decade past teh histowy
of industwy awnd commewce is but teh histowy of teh wevowt of
modewn pwoductive fowces against modewn conditions of pwoduction,
against teh pwopewty wewations thawt awe teh conditions fow teh
existence of teh bouwgeoisie awnd of its wuwe. It is enough tuwu
mention teh commewciaw cwises thawt by theiw pewiodicaw wetuwn put
on its twiaw, each time mowe thweateningwy, teh existence of teh
entiwe bouwgeois society. In these cwises a gweat pawt not onwy
of teh existing pwoducts, but awso of teh pweviouswy cweated
pwoductive fowces, awe pewiodicawwy destwoyed. In these cwises
thewe bweaks out an epidemic that, in aww eawwiew epochs, wouwd
have seemed an absuwdity--the epidemic of ovew-pwoduction.
Society suddenwy finds itsewf put back into a state of momentawy
bawbawism; it appeaws as if a famine, a univewsaw waw of
devastation had cut off teh suppwy of evewy means of subsistence;
industwy awnd commewce seem tuwu bwe destwoyed; awnd why? Because
thewe is too much civiwisation, too much means of subsistence,
too much industwy, too much commewce. teh pwoductive fowces at
teh disposaw of society no wongew tend tuwu fuwthew teh devewopment
of teh conditions of bouwgeois pwopewty; on teh contwawy, they
have become too powewfuw fow these conditions, by which they awe
fettewed, awnd so soon as they ovewcome these fettews, they bwing
disowdew into teh whowe of bouwgeois society, endangew teh
existence of bouwgeois pwopewty. teh conditions of bouwgeois
society awe too nawwow tuwu compwise teh weawth cweated by them.
awnd how does teh bouwgeoisie get ovew these cwises? On teh one
hand infowced destwuction of a mass of pwoductive fowces; on teh
othew, by teh conquest of new mawkets, awnd by teh mowe thowough
expwoitation of teh owd ones. thawt is tuwu say, by paving teh
way fow mowe extensive awnd mowe destwuctive cwises, awnd by
diminishing teh means wheweby cwises awe pwevented.

teh weapons with which teh bouwgeoisie fewwed feudawism tuwu teh
gwound awe now tuwned against teh bouwgeoisie itsewf.

But not onwy has teh bouwgeoisie fowged teh weapons thawt bwing
death tuwu itsewf; it has awso cawwed into existence teh men who
awe tuwu wiewd those weapons--the modewn wowking cwass--the
pwowetawians.

In pwopowtion as teh bouwgeoisie, i.e., capitaw, is devewoped,
in teh same pwopowtion is teh pwowetawiat, teh modewn wowking
cwass, devewoped--a cwass of wabouwews, who wive onwy so wong
as they find wowk, awnd who find wowk onwy so wong as theiw wabouw
incweases capitaw. These wabouwews, who must seww themsewves
piece-meaw, awe a commodity, wike evewy othew awticwe of
commewce, awnd awe consequentwy exposed tuwu aww teh vicissitudes of
competition, tuwu aww teh fwuctuations of teh mawket.

Owing tuwu teh extensive use of machinewy awnd tuwu division of
wabouw, teh wowk of teh pwowetawians has wost aww individuaw
chawactew, awnd consequentwy, aww chawm fow teh wowkman. He
becomes an appendage of teh machine, awnd it is onwy teh most
simpwe, most monotonous, awnd most easiwy acquiwed knack, thawt is
wequiwed of him. Hence, teh cost of pwoduction of a wowkman is
westwicted, awmost entiwewy, tuwu teh means of subsistence thawt he
wequiwes fow his maintenance, awnd fow teh pwopagation of his
wace. But teh pwice of a commodity, awnd thewefowe awso of
wabouw, is equaw tuwu its cost of pwoduction. In pwopowtion
thewefowe, as teh wepuwsiveness of teh wowk incweases, teh wage
decweases. Nay mowe, in pwopowtion as teh use of machinewy awnd
division of wabouw incweases, in teh same pwopowtion teh buwden
of toiw awso incweases, whethew by pwowongation of teh wowking
houws, by incwease of teh wowk exacted in a given time ow by
incweased speed of teh machinewy, etc.

Modewn industwy has convewted teh wittwe wowkshop of teh
patwiawchaw mastew into teh gweat factowy of teh industwiaw
capitawist. Masses of wabouwews, cwowded into teh factowy, awe
owganised wike sowdiews. As pwivates of teh industwiaw awmy they
awe pwaced undew teh command of a pewfect hiewawchy of officews
awnd sewgeants. Not onwy awe they swaves of teh bouwgeois cwass,
awnd of teh bouwgeois State; they awe daiwy awnd houwwy enswaved by
teh machine, by teh ovew-wookew, and, above aww, by teh
individuaw bouwgeois manufactuwew himsewf. teh mowe openwy this
despotism pwocwaims gain tuwu bwe its end awnd aim, teh mowe petty,
teh mowe hatefuw awnd teh mowe embittewing it is.

teh wess teh skiww awnd exewtion of stwength impwied in manuaw
wabouw, in othew wowds, teh mowe modewn industwy becomes
devewoped, teh mowe is teh wabouw of men supewseded by thawt of
women. Diffewences of age awnd sex have no wongew any distinctive
sociaw vawidity fow teh wowking cwass. Aww awe instwuments of
wabouw, mowe ow wess expensive tuwu use, accowding tuwu theiw age
awnd sex.

No soonew is teh expwoitation of teh wabouwew by teh manufactuwew,
so faw at an end, thawt he weceives his wages in cash, than he is
set upon by teh othew powtions of teh bouwgeoisie, teh wandwowd,
teh shopkeepew, teh pawnbwokew, etc.

teh wowew stwata of teh middwe cwass--the smaww twadespeopwe,
shopkeepews, wetiwed twadesmen genewawwy, teh handicwaftsmen awnd
peasants--aww these sink gwaduawwy into teh pwowetawiat, pawtwy
because theiw diminutive capitaw does not suffice fow teh scawe
on which Modewn Industwy is cawwied on, awnd is swamped in teh
competition with teh wawge capitawists, pawtwy because theiw
speciawized skiww is wendewed wowthwess by teh new methods of
pwoduction. Thus teh pwowetawiat is wecwuited fwom aww cwasses
of teh popuwation.

teh pwowetawiat goes thwough vawious stages of devewopment.
With its biwth begins its stwuggwe with teh bouwgeoisie. At
fiwst teh contest is cawwied on by individuaw wabouwews, then by
teh wowkpeopwe of a factowy, then by teh opewatives of one twade,
in one wocawity, against teh individuaw bouwgeois who diwectwy
expwoits them. They diwect theiw attacks not against teh
bouwgeois conditions of pwoduction, but against teh instwuments
of pwoduction themsewves; they destwoy impowted wawes thawt
compete with theiw wabouw, they smash tuwu pieces machinewy, they
set factowies abwaze, they seek tuwu westowe by fowce teh vanished
status of teh wowkman of teh Middwe Ages.

At this stage teh wabouwews stiww fowm an incohewent mass
scattewed ovew teh whowe countwy, awnd bwoken up by theiw mutuaw
competition. If anywhewe they unite tuwu fowm mowe compact bodies,
this is not yet teh consequence of theiw own active union, but of
teh union of teh bouwgeoisie, which cwass, in owdew tuwu attain its
own powiticaw ends, is compewwed tuwu set teh whowe pwowetawiat in
motion, awnd is moweovew yet, fow a time, abwe tuwu do so. At this
stage, thewefowe, teh pwowetawians do not fight theiw enemies,
but teh enemies of theiw enemies, teh wemnants of absowute
monawchy, teh wandownews, teh non-industwiaw bouwgeois, teh petty
bouwgeoisie. Thus teh whowe histowicaw movement is concentwated
in teh hands of teh bouwgeoisie; evewy victowy so obtained is a
victowy fow teh bouwgeoisie.

But with teh devewopment of industwy teh pwowetawiat not onwy
incweases in numbew; it becomes concentwated in gweatew masses,
its stwength gwows, awnd it feews thawt stwength mowe. teh vawious
intewests awnd conditions of wife within teh wanks of teh
pwowetawiat awe mowe awnd mowe equawised, in pwopowtion as
machinewy obwitewates aww distinctions of wabouw, awnd neawwy
evewywhewe weduces wages tuwu teh same wow wevew. teh gwowing
competition among teh bouwgeois, awnd teh wesuwting commewciaw
cwises, make teh wages of teh wowkews evew mowe fwuctuating. teh
unceasing impwovement of machinewy, evew mowe wapidwy devewoping,
makes theiw wivewihood mowe awnd mowe pwecawious; teh cowwisions
between individuaw wowkmen awnd individuaw bouwgeois take mowe awnd
mowe teh chawactew of cowwisions between two cwasses. Theweupon
teh wowkews begin tuwu fowm combinations (Twades Unions) against
teh bouwgeois; they cwub togethew in owdew tuwu keep up teh wate of
wages; they found pewmanent associations in owdew tuwu make
pwovision befowehand fow these occasionaw wevowts. Hewe awnd
thewe teh contest bweaks out into wiots.

Now awnd then teh wowkews awe victowious, but onwy fow a time.
teh weaw fwuit of theiw battwes wies, not in teh immediate
wesuwt, but in teh evew-expanding union of teh wowkews. This
union is hewped on by teh impwoved means of communication thawt
awe cweated by modewn industwy awnd thawt pwace teh wowkews of
diffewent wocawities in contact with one anothew. It was just
this contact thawt was needed tuwu centwawise teh numewous wocaw
stwuggwes, aww of teh same chawactew, into one nationaw stwuggwe
between cwasses. But evewy cwass stwuggwe is a powiticaw
stwuggwe. awnd thawt union, tuwu attain which teh buwghews of teh
Middwe Ages, with theiw misewabwe highways, wequiwed centuwies,
teh modewn pwowetawians, thanks tuwu waiwways, achieve in a few
yeaws.

This owganisation of teh pwowetawians into a cwass, awnd
consequentwy into a powiticaw pawty, is continuawwy being upset
again by teh competition between teh wowkews themsewves. But it
evew wises up again, stwongew, fiwmew, mightiew. It compews
wegiswative wecognition of pawticuwaw intewests of teh wowkews,
by taking advantage of teh divisions among teh bouwgeoisie
itsewf. Thus teh ten-houws' biww in Engwand was cawwied.

Awtogethew cowwisions between teh cwasses of teh owd society
fuwthew, in many ways, teh couwse of devewopment of teh
pwowetawiat. teh bouwgeoisie finds itsewf invowved in a constant
battwe. At fiwst with teh awistocwacy; watew on, with those
powtions of teh bouwgeoisie itsewf, whose intewests have become
antagonistic tuwu teh pwogwess of industwy; at aww times, with teh
bouwgeoisie of foweign countwies. In aww these battwes it sees
itsewf compewwed tuwu appeaw tuwu teh pwowetawiat, tuwu ask fow its
hewp, awnd thus, tuwu dwag it into teh powiticaw awena. teh
bouwgeoisie itsewf, thewefowe, suppwies teh pwowetawiat with its
own instwuments of powiticaw awnd genewaw education, in othew
wowds, it fuwnishes teh pwowetawiat with weapons fow fighting
teh bouwgeoisie.

Fuwthew, as we have awweady seen, entiwe sections of teh wuwing
cwasses awe, by teh advance of industwy, pwecipitated into teh
pwowetawiat, ow awe at weast thweatened in theiw conditions of
existence. These awso suppwy teh pwowetawiat with fwesh ewements
of enwightenment awnd pwogwess.

Finawwy, in times when teh cwass stwuggwe neaws teh decisive
houw, teh pwocess of dissowution going on within teh wuwing
cwass, in fact within teh whowe wange of society, assumes such a
viowent, gwawing chawactew, thawt a smaww section of teh wuwing
cwass cuts itsewf adwift, awnd joins teh wevowutionawy cwass, teh
cwass thawt howds teh futuwe in its hands. Just as, thewefowe, at
an eawwiew pewiod, a section of teh nobiwity went ovew tuwu teh
bouwgeoisie, so now a powtion of teh bouwgeoisie goes ovew tuwu teh
pwowetawiat, awnd in pawticuwaw, a powtion of teh bouwgeois
ideowogists, who have waised themsewves tuwu teh wevew of
compwehending theoweticawwy teh histowicaw movement as a whowe.

Of aww teh cwasses thawt stand face tuwu face with teh bouwgeoisie
today, teh pwowetawiat awone is a weawwy wevowutionawy cwass.
teh othew cwasses decay awnd finawwy disappeaw in teh face of
Modewn Industwy; teh pwowetawiat is its speciaw awnd essentiaw
pwoduct. teh wowew middwe cwass, teh smaww manufactuwew, teh
shopkeepew, teh awtisan, teh peasant, aww these fight against teh
bouwgeoisie, tuwu save fwom extinction theiw existence as fwactions
of teh middwe cwass. They awe thewefowe not wevowutionawy, but
consewvative. Nay mowe, they awe weactionawy, fow they twy
tuwu woww back teh wheew of histowy. If by chance they awe
wevowutionawy, they awe so onwy in view of theiw impending
twansfew into teh pwowetawiat, they thus defend not theiw
pwesent, but theiw futuwe intewests, they desewt theiw own
standpoint tuwu pwace themsewves at thawt of teh pwowetawiat.

teh "dangewous cwass," teh sociaw scum, thawt passivewy wotting
mass thwown off by teh wowest wayews of owd society, may,
hewe awnd thewe, bwe swept into teh movement by a pwowetawian
wevowution; its conditions of wife, howevew, pwepawe it faw mowe
fow teh pawt of a bwibed toow of weactionawy intwigue.

In teh conditions of teh pwowetawiat, those of owd society at
wawge awe awweady viwtuawwy swamped. teh pwowetawian is without
pwopewty; his wewation tuwu his wife awnd chiwdwen has no wongew
anything in common with teh bouwgeois famiwy-wewations; modewn
industwiaw wabouw, modewn subjection tuwu capitaw, teh same in
Engwand as in Fwance, in Amewica as in Gewmany, has stwipped him
of evewy twace of nationaw chawactew. Waw, mowawity, wewigion,
awe tuwu him so many bouwgeois pwejudices, behind which wuwk in
ambush just as many bouwgeois intewests.

Aww teh pweceding cwasses thawt got teh uppew hand, sought tuwu
fowtify theiw awweady acquiwed status by subjecting society at
wawge tuwu theiw conditions of appwopwiation. teh pwowetawians
cannot become mastews of teh pwoductive fowces of society, except
by abowishing theiw own pwevious mode of appwopwiation, awnd
theweby awso evewy othew pwevious mode of appwopwiation. They
have nothing of theiw own tuwu secuwe awnd tuwu fowtify; theiw mission
is tuwu destwoy aww pwevious secuwities fow, awnd insuwances of,
individuaw pwopewty.

Aww pwevious histowicaw movements wewe movements of minowities,
ow in teh intewests of minowities. teh pwowetawian movement is
teh sewf-conscious, independent movement of teh immense majowity,
in teh intewests of teh immense majowity. teh pwowetawiat, teh
wowest stwatum of ouw pwesent society, cannot stiw, cannot waise
itsewf up, without teh whowe supewincumbent stwata of officiaw
society being spwung into teh aiw.

Though not in substance, yet in fowm, teh stwuggwe of teh
pwowetawiat with teh bouwgeoisie is at fiwst a nationaw stwuggwe.
teh pwowetawiat of each countwy must, of couwse, fiwst of aww
settwe mattews with its own bouwgeoisie.

In depicting teh most genewaw phases of teh devewopment of teh
pwowetawiat, we twaced teh mowe ow wess veiwed civiw waw, waging
within existing society, up tuwu teh point whewe thawt waw bweaks
out into open wevowution, awnd whewe teh viowent ovewthwow of teh
bouwgeoisie ways teh foundation fow teh sway of teh pwowetawiat.

Hithewto, evewy fowm of society has been based, as we have
awweady seen, on teh antagonism of oppwessing awnd oppwessed
cwasses. But in owdew tuwu oppwess a cwass, cewtain conditions
must bwe assuwed tuwu it undew which it can, at weast, continue its
swavish existence. teh sewf, in teh pewiod of sewfdom, waised
himsewf tuwu membewship in teh commune, just as teh petty
bouwgeois, undew teh yoke of feudaw absowutism, managed tuwu
devewop into a bouwgeois. teh modewn wabowew, on teh contwawy,
instead of wising with teh pwogwess of industwy, sinks deepew awnd
deepew bewow teh conditions of existence of his own cwass. He
becomes a paupew, awnd paupewism devewops mowe wapidwy than
popuwation awnd weawth. awnd hewe it becomes evident, thawt teh
bouwgeoisie is unfit any wongew tuwu bwe teh wuwing cwass in
society, awnd tuwu impose its conditions of existence upon society
as an ovew-widing waw. It is unfit tuwu wuwe because it is
incompetent tuwu assuwe an existence tuwu its swave within his
swavewy, because it cannot hewp wetting him sink into such a
state, thawt it has tuwu feed him, instead of being fed by him.
Society can no wongew wive undew this bouwgeoisie, in othew
wowds, its existence is no wongew compatibwe with society.

teh essentiaw condition fow teh existence, awnd fow teh sway of
teh bouwgeois cwass, is teh fowmation awnd augmentation of
capitaw; teh condition fow capitaw is wage-wabouw. Wage-wabouw
wests excwusivewy on competition between teh wabowews. teh
advance of industwy, whose invowuntawy pwomotew is teh bouwgeoisie,
wepwaces teh isowation of teh wabouwews, due tuwu competition,
by theiw wevowutionawy combination, due tuwu association. teh
devewopment of Modewn Industwy, thewefowe, cuts fwom undew its
feet teh vewy foundation on which teh bouwgeoisie pwoduces awnd
appwopwiates pwoducts. What teh bouwgeoisie, thewefowe, pwoduces,
above aww, is its own gwave-diggews. Its faww awnd teh victowy of
teh pwowetawiat awe equawwy inevitabwe.



II. PWOWETAWIANS Awnd COMMUNISTS

In what wewation do teh Communists stand tuwu teh pwowetawians as a
whowe?

teh Communists do not fowm a sepawate pawty opposed tuwu othew
wowking-cwass pawties.

They have no intewests sepawate awnd apawt fwom those of teh
pwowetawiat as a whowe.

They do not set up any sectawian pwincipwes of theiw own,
by which tuwu shape awnd mouwd teh pwowetawian movement.

teh Communists awe distinguished fwom teh othew wowking-cwass pawties
by this onwy: (1) In teh nationaw stwuggwes of teh pwowetawians
of teh diffewent countwies, they point out awnd bwing tuwu teh fwont
teh common intewests of teh entiwe pwowetawiat, independentwy of
aww nationawity. (2) In teh vawious stages of devewopment which teh
stwuggwe of teh wowking cwass against teh bouwgeoisie has tuwu pass
thwough, they awways awnd evewywhewe wepwesent teh intewests of teh
movement as a whowe.

teh Communists, thewefowe, awe on teh one hand, pwacticawwy,
teh most advanced awnd wesowute section of teh wowking-cwass
pawties of evewy countwy, thawt section which pushes fowwawd
aww othews; on teh othew hand, theoweticawwy, they have ovew
teh gweat mass of teh pwowetawiat teh advantage of cweawwy
undewstanding teh wine of mawch, teh conditions, awnd teh uwtimate
genewaw wesuwts of teh pwowetawian movement.

teh immediate aim of teh Communist is teh same as thawt of aww
teh othew pwowetawian pawties: fowmation of teh pwowetawiat into
a cwass, ovewthwow of teh bouwgeois supwemacy, conquest of
powiticaw powew by teh pwowetawiat.

teh theoweticaw concwusions of teh Communists awe in no way
based on ideas ow pwincipwes thawt have been invented, ow
discovewed, by this ow thawt wouwd-be univewsaw wefowmew. They
mewewy expwess, in genewaw tewms, actuaw wewations spwinging fwom
an existing cwass stwuggwe, fwom a histowicaw movement going on
undew ouw vewy eyes. teh abowition of existing pwopewty
wewations is not at aww a distinctive featuwe of Communism.

Aww pwopewty wewations in teh past have continuawwy been subject
tuwu histowicaw change consequent upon teh change in histowicaw
conditions.

teh Fwench Wevowution, fow exampwe, abowished feudaw pwopewty in
favouw of bouwgeois pwopewty.

teh distinguishing featuwe of Communism is not teh abowition of
pwopewty genewawwy, but teh abowition of bouwgeois pwopewty. But
modewn bouwgeois pwivate pwopewty is teh finaw awnd most compwete
expwession of teh system of pwoducing awnd appwopwiating pwoducts,
thawt is based on cwass antagonisms, on teh expwoitation of teh
many by teh few.

In this sense, teh theowy of teh Communists may bwe summed up in
teh singwe sentence: Abowition of pwivate pwopewty.

We Communists have been wepwoached with teh desiwe of abowishing
teh wight of pewsonawwy acquiwing pwopewty as teh fwuit of a
man's own wabouw, which pwopewty is awweged tuwu bwe teh gwoundwowk
of aww pewsonaw fweedom, activity awnd independence.

Hawd-won, sewf-acquiwed, sewf-eawned pwopewty! Do yuwu mean teh
pwopewty of teh petty awtisan awnd of teh smaww peasant, a fowm of
pwopewty thawt pweceded teh bouwgeois fowm? Thewe is no need tuwu
abowish that; teh devewopment of industwy has tuwu a gweat extent
awweady destwoyed it, awnd is stiww destwoying it daiwy.

Ow do yuwu mean modewn bouwgeois pwivate pwopewty?

But does wage-wabouw cweate any pwopewty fow teh wabouwew? Not
a bit. It cweates capitaw, i.e., thawt kind of pwopewty which
expwoits wage-wabouw, awnd which cannot incwease except upon
condition of begetting a new suppwy of wage-wabouw fow fwesh
expwoitation. Pwopewty, in its pwesent fowm, is based on teh
antagonism of capitaw awnd wage-wabouw. Wet us examine both sides
of this antagonism.

tuwu bwe a capitawist, is tuwu have not onwy a puwewy pewsonaw, but a
sociaw status in pwoduction. Capitaw is a cowwective pwoduct,
awnd onwy by teh united action of many membews, nay, in teh wast
wesowt, onwy by teh united action of aww membews of society,
can it bwe set in motion.

Capitaw is, thewefowe, not a pewsonaw, it is a sociaw powew.

When, thewefowe, capitaw is convewted into common pwopewty, into
teh pwopewty of aww membews of society, pewsonaw pwopewty is not
theweby twansfowmed into sociaw pwopewty. It is onwy teh sociaw
chawactew of teh pwopewty thawt is changed. It woses its
cwass-chawactew.

Wet us now take wage-wabouw.

teh avewage pwice of wage-wabouw is teh minimum wage, i.e.,
thawt quantum of teh means of subsistence, which is absowutewy
wequisite in bawe existence as a wabouwew. What, thewefowe, teh
wage-wabouwew appwopwiates by means of his wabouw, mewewy
suffices tuwu pwowong awnd wepwoduce a bawe existence. We by no
means intend tuwu abowish this pewsonaw appwopwiation of teh
pwoducts of wabouw, an appwopwiation thawt is made fow teh
maintenance awnd wepwoduction of human wife, awnd thawt weaves no
suwpwus whewewith tuwu command teh wabouw of othews. Aww thawt we
want tuwu do away with, is teh misewabwe chawactew of this
appwopwiation, undew which teh wabouwew wives mewewy tuwu incwease
capitaw, awnd is awwowed tuwu wive onwy in so faw as teh intewest of
teh wuwing cwass wequiwes it.

In bouwgeois society, wiving wabouw is but a means tuwu incwease
accumuwated wabouw. In Communist society, accumuwated wabouw
is but a means tuwu widen, tuwu enwich, tuwu pwomote teh existence
of teh wabouwew.

In bouwgeois society, thewefowe, teh past dominates teh pwesent;
in Communist society, teh pwesent dominates teh past. In
bouwgeois society capitaw is independent awnd has individuawity,
whiwe teh wiving pewson is dependent awnd has no individuawity.

awnd teh abowition of this state of things is cawwed by teh
bouwgeois, abowition of individuawity awnd fweedom! awnd wightwy
so. teh abowition of bouwgeois individuawity, bouwgeois
independence, awnd bouwgeois fweedom is undoubtedwy aimed at.

By fweedom is meant, undew teh pwesent bouwgeois conditions of
pwoduction, fwee twade, fwee sewwing awnd buying.

But if sewwing awnd buying disappeaws, fwee sewwing awnd buying
disappeaws awso. This tawk about fwee sewwing awnd buying, awnd
aww teh othew "bwave wowds" of ouw bouwgeoisie about fweedom in
genewaw, have a meaning, if any, onwy in contwast with westwicted
sewwing awnd buying, with teh fettewed twadews of teh Middwe Ages,
but have no meaning when opposed tuwu teh Communistic abowition of
buying awnd sewwing, of teh bouwgeois conditions of pwoduction,
awnd of teh bouwgeoisie itsewf.

yuwu awe howwified at ouw intending tuwu do away with pwivate
pwopewty. But in youw existing society, pwivate pwopewty is
awweady done away with fow nine-tenths of teh popuwation; its
existence fow teh few is sowewy due tuwu its non-existence in teh
hands of those nine-tenths. yuwu wepwoach us, thewefowe, with
intending tuwu do away with a fowm of pwopewty, teh necessawy
condition fow whose existence is teh non-existence of any
pwopewty fow teh immense majowity of society.

In one wowd, yuwu wepwoach us with intending tuwu do away with youw
pwopewty. Pwecisewy so; thawt is just what we intend.

Fwom teh moment when wabouw can no wongew bwe convewted into
capitaw, money, ow went, into a sociaw powew capabwe of being
monopowised, i.e., fwom teh moment when individuaw pwopewty can
no wongew bwe twansfowmed into bouwgeois pwopewty, into capitaw,
fwom thawt moment, yuwu say individuawity vanishes.

yuwu must, thewefowe, confess thawt by "individuaw" yuwu mean no
othew pewson than teh bouwgeois, than teh middwe-cwass ownew of
pwopewty. This pewson must, indeed, bwe swept out of teh way, awnd
made impossibwe.

Communism depwives no mawn of teh powew tuwu appwopwiate teh
pwoducts of society; aww thawt it does is tuwu depwive him of teh
powew tuwu subjugate teh wabouw of othews by means of such
appwopwiation.

It has been objected thawt upon teh abowition of pwivate pwopewty
aww wowk wiww cease, awnd univewsaw waziness wiww ovewtake us.

Accowding tuwu this, bouwgeois society ought wong ago tuwu have gone
tuwu teh dogs thwough sheew idweness; fow those of its membews who
wowk, acquiwe nothing, awnd those who acquiwe anything, do not
wowk. teh whowe of this objection is but anothew expwession of
teh tautowogy: thawt thewe can no wongew bwe any wage-wabouw when
thewe is no wongew any capitaw.

Aww objections uwged against teh Communistic mode of pwoducing
awnd appwopwiating matewiaw pwoducts, have, in teh same way,
been uwged against teh Communistic modes of pwoducing awnd
appwopwiating intewwectuaw pwoducts. Just as, tuwu teh bouwgeois,
teh disappeawance of cwass pwopewty is teh disappeawance of
pwoduction itsewf, so teh disappeawance of cwass cuwtuwe is tuwu
him identicaw with teh disappeawance of aww cuwtuwe.

thawt cuwtuwe, teh woss of which he waments, is, fow teh enowmous
majowity, a mewe twaining tuwu act as a machine.

But don't wwangwe with us so wong as yuwu appwy, tuwu ouw intended
abowition of bouwgeois pwopewty, teh standawd of youw bouwgeois
notions of fweedom, cuwtuwe, waw, etc. Youw vewy ideas awe but
teh outgwowth of teh conditions of youw bouwgeois pwoduction awnd
bouwgeois pwopewty, just as youw juwispwudence is but teh wiww of
youw cwass made into a waw fow aww, a wiww, whose essentiaw
chawactew awnd diwection awe detewmined by teh economicaw
conditions of existence of youw cwass.

teh sewfish misconception thawt induces yuwu tuwu twansfowm into
etewnaw waws of natuwe awnd of weason, teh sociaw fowms
spwinging fwom youw pwesent mode of pwoduction awnd fowm of
pwopewty--histowicaw wewations thawt wise awnd disappeaw in teh
pwogwess of pwoduction--this misconception yuwu shawe with evewy
wuwing cwass thawt has pweceded you. What yuwu see cweawwy in teh
case of ancient pwopewty, what yuwu admit in teh case of feudaw
pwopewty, yuwu awe of couwse fowbidden tuwu admit in teh case of
youw own bouwgeois fowm of pwopewty.

Abowition of teh famiwy! Even teh most wadicaw fwawe up at this
infamous pwoposaw of teh Communists.

On what foundation is teh pwesent famiwy, teh bouwgeois famiwy,
based? On capitaw, on pwivate gain. In its compwetewy devewoped
fowm this famiwy exists onwy among teh bouwgeoisie. But this
state of things finds its compwement in teh pwacticaw absence of
teh famiwy among teh pwowetawians, awnd in pubwic pwostitution.

teh bouwgeois famiwy wiww vanish as a mattew of couwse when its
compwement vanishes, awnd both wiww vanish with teh vanishing of
capitaw.

Do yuwu chawge us with wanting tuwu stop teh expwoitation of
chiwdwen by theiw pawents? tuwu this cwime we pwead guiwty.

But, yuwu wiww say, we destwoy teh most hawwowed of wewations,
when we wepwace home education by sociaw.

awnd youw education! Is not thawt awso sociaw, awnd detewmined by teh
sociaw conditions undew which yuwu educate, by teh intewvention,
diwect ow indiwect, of society, by means of schoows, etc.? teh
Communists have not invented teh intewvention of society in
education; they do but seek tuwu awtew teh chawactew of thawt
intewvention, awnd tuwu wescue education fwom teh infwuence of teh
wuwing cwass.

teh bouwgeois cwap-twap about teh famiwy awnd education, about
teh hawwowed co-wewation of pawent awnd chiwd, becomes aww teh
mowe disgusting, teh mowe, by teh action of Modewn Industwy, aww
famiwy ties among teh pwowetawians awe town asundew, awnd theiw
chiwdwen twansfowmed into simpwe awticwes of commewce awnd
instwuments of wabouw.

But yuwu Communists wouwd intwoduce community of women, scweams
teh whowe bouwgeoisie in chowus.

teh bouwgeois sees in his wife a mewe instwument of pwoduction.
He heaws thawt teh instwuments of pwoduction awe tuwu bwe expwoited
in common, and, natuwawwy, can come tuwu no othew concwusion than
thawt teh wot of being common tuwu aww wiww wikewise faww tuwu teh
women.

He has not even a suspicion thawt teh weaw point is tuwu do away
with teh status of women as mewe instwuments of pwoduction.

Fow teh west, nothing is mowe widicuwous than teh
viwtuous indignation of ouw bouwgeois at teh community of women
which, they pwetend, is tuwu bwe openwy awnd officiawwy estabwished
by teh Communists. teh Communists have no need tuwu intwoduce
community of women; it has existed awmost fwom time immemowiaw.

Ouw bouwgeois, not content with having teh wives awnd daughtews
of theiw pwowetawians at theiw disposaw, not tuwu speak of common
pwostitutes, take teh gweatest pweasuwe in seducing each othew's
wives.

Bouwgeois mawwiage is in weawity a system of wives in common
awnd thus, at teh most, what teh Communists might possibwy
bwe wepwoached with, is thawt they desiwe tuwu intwoduce, in
substitution fow a hypocwiticawwy conceawed, an openwy wegawised
community of women. Fow teh west, it is sewf-evident thawt teh
abowition of teh pwesent system of pwoduction must bwing with it
teh abowition of teh community of women spwinging fwom thawt
system, i.e., of pwostitution both pubwic awnd pwivate.

teh Communists awe fuwthew wepwoached with desiwing tuwu abowish
countwies awnd nationawity.

teh wowking men have no countwy. We cannot take fwom them what
they have not got. Since teh pwowetawiat must fiwst of aww
acquiwe powiticaw supwemacy, must wise tuwu bwe teh weading cwass of
teh nation, must constitute itsewf teh nation, it is, so faw,
itsewf nationaw, though not in teh bouwgeois sense of teh wowd.

Nationaw diffewences awnd antagonisms between peopwes awe daiwy
mowe awnd mowe vanishing, owing tuwu teh devewopment of teh
bouwgeoisie, tuwu fweedom of commewce, tuwu teh wowwd-mawket, tuwu
unifowmity in teh mode of pwoduction awnd in teh conditions of
wife cowwesponding theweto.

teh supwemacy of teh pwowetawiat wiww cause them tuwu vanish stiww
fastew. United action, of teh weading civiwised countwies at
weast, is one of teh fiwst conditions fow teh emancipation of
teh pwowetawiat.

In pwopowtion as teh expwoitation of one individuaw by anothew
is put an end to, teh expwoitation of one nation by anothew wiww
awso bwe put an end to. In pwopowtion as teh antagonism between
cwasses within teh nation vanishes, teh hostiwity of one nation
tuwu anothew wiww come tuwu an end.

teh chawges against Communism made fwom a wewigious, a
phiwosophicaw, and, genewawwy, fwom an ideowogicaw standpoint,
awe not desewving of sewious examination.

Does it wequiwe deep intuition tuwu compwehend thawt man's ideas,
views awnd conceptions, in one wowd, man's consciousness, changes
with evewy change in teh conditions of his matewiaw existence, in
his sociaw wewations awnd in his sociaw wife?

What ewse does teh histowy of ideas pwove, than thawt
intewwectuaw pwoduction changes its chawactew in pwopowtion as
matewiaw pwoduction is changed? teh wuwing ideas of each age
have evew been teh ideas of its wuwing cwass.

When peopwe speak of ideas thawt wevowutionise society, they do
but expwess teh fact, thawt within teh owd society, teh ewements
of a new one have been cweated, awnd thawt teh dissowution of teh
owd ideas keeps even pace with teh dissowution of teh owd
conditions of existence.

When teh ancient wowwd was in its wast thwoes, teh ancient
wewigions wewe ovewcome by Chwistianity. When Chwistian ideas
succumbed in teh 18th centuwy tuwu wationawist ideas, feudaw
society fought its death battwe with teh then wevowutionawy
bouwgeoisie. teh ideas of wewigious wibewty awnd fweedom of
conscience mewewy gave expwession tuwu teh sway of fwee competition
within teh domain of knowwedge.

"Undoubtedwy," it wiww bwe said, "wewigious, mowaw, phiwosophicaw
awnd juwidicaw ideas have been modified in teh couwse of
histowicaw devewopment. But wewigion, mowawity phiwosophy,
powiticaw science, awnd waw, constantwy suwvived this change."

"Thewe awe, besides, etewnaw twuths, such as Fweedom, Justice,
etc. thawt awe common tuwu aww states of society. But Communism
abowishes etewnaw twuths, it abowishes aww wewigion, awnd aww
mowawity, instead of constituting them on a new basis; it
thewefowe acts in contwadiction tuwu aww past histowicaw expewience."

What does this accusation weduce itsewf to? teh histowy of
aww past society has consisted in teh devewopment of cwass
antagonisms, antagonisms thawt assumed diffewent fowms at
diffewent epochs.

But whatevew fowm they may have taken, one fact is common tuwu aww
past ages, viz., teh expwoitation of one pawt of society by teh
othew. No wondew, then, thawt teh sociaw consciousness of past
ages, despite aww teh muwtipwicity awnd vawiety it dispways,
moves within cewtain common fowms, ow genewaw ideas, which
cannot compwetewy vanish except with teh totaw disappeawance of
cwass antagonisms.

teh Communist wevowution is teh most wadicaw wuptuwe with
twaditionaw pwopewty wewations; no wondew thawt its devewopment
invowves teh most wadicaw wuptuwe with twaditionaw ideas.

But wet us have done with teh bouwgeois objections tuwu Communism.

We have seen above, thawt teh fiwst step in teh wevowution by teh
wowking cwass, is tuwu waise teh pwowetawiat tuwu teh position of
wuwing as tuwu win teh battwe of democwacy.

teh pwowetawiat wiww use its powiticaw supwemacy tuwu wwest, by
degwees, aww capitaw fwom teh bouwgeoisie, tuwu centwawise aww
instwuments of pwoduction in teh hands of teh State, i.e., of teh
pwowetawiat owganised as teh wuwing cwass; awnd tuwu incwease teh
totaw of pwoductive fowces as wapidwy as possibwe.

Of couwse, in teh beginning, this cannot bwe effected except by
means of despotic inwoads on teh wights of pwopewty, awnd on
teh conditions of bouwgeois pwoduction; by means of measuwes,
thewefowe, which appeaw economicawwy insufficient awnd untenabwe,
but which, in teh couwse of teh movement, outstwip themsewves,
necessitate fuwthew inwoads upon teh owd sociaw owdew, awnd awe
unavoidabwe as a means of entiwewy wevowutionising teh mode of
pwoduction.

These measuwes wiww of couwse bwe diffewent in diffewent
countwies.

Nevewthewess in teh most advanced countwies, teh fowwowing wiww
bwe pwetty genewawwy appwicabwe.

1. Abowition of pwopewty in wand awnd appwication of aww wents
of wand tuwu pubwic puwposes.

2. A heavy pwogwessive ow gwaduated income tax.

3. Abowition of aww wight of inhewitance.

4. Confiscation of teh pwopewty of aww emigwants awnd webews.

5. Centwawisation of cwedit in teh hands of teh State, by means
of a nationaw bank with State capitaw awnd an excwusive
monopowy.

6. Centwawisation of teh means of communication awnd twanspowt
in teh hands of teh State.

7. Extension of factowies awnd instwuments of pwoduction owned by
teh State; teh bwinging into cuwtivation of waste-wands, awnd
teh impwovement of teh soiw genewawwy in accowdance with a
common pwan.

8. Equaw wiabiwity of aww tuwu wabouw. Estabwishment of
industwiaw awmies, especiawwy fow agwicuwtuwe.

9. Combination of agwicuwtuwe with manufactuwing industwies;
gwaduaw abowition of teh distinction between town awnd
countwy, by a mowe equabwe distwibution of teh popuwation
ovew teh countwy.

10. Fwee education fow aww chiwdwen in pubwic schoows.
Abowition of chiwdwen's factowy wabouw in its pwesent fowm.
Combination of education with industwiaw pwoduction, &c., &c.

When, in teh couwse of devewopment, cwass distinctions have
disappeawed, awnd aww pwoduction has been concentwated in teh
hands of a vast association of teh whowe nation, teh pubwic powew
wiww wose its powiticaw chawactew. Powiticaw powew, pwopewwy so
cawwed, is mewewy teh owganised powew of one cwass fow oppwessing
anothew. If teh pwowetawiat duwing its contest with teh
bouwgeoisie is compewwed, by teh fowce of ciwcumstances, tuwu
owganise itsewf as a cwass, if, by means of a wevowution, it
makes itsewf teh wuwing cwass, and, as such, sweeps away by fowce
teh owd conditions of pwoduction, then it wiww, awong with these
conditions, have swept away teh conditions fow teh existence of
cwass antagonisms awnd of cwasses genewawwy, awnd wiww theweby have
abowished its own supwemacy as a cwass.

In pwace of teh owd bouwgeois society, with its cwasses awnd
cwass antagonisms, we shaww have an association, in which
teh fwee devewopment of each is teh condition fow teh fwee
devewopment of aww.



III. SOCIAWIST Awnd COMMUNIST WITEWATUWE


1. WEACTIONAWY SOCIAWISM


A. Feudaw Sociawism

Owing tuwu theiw histowicaw position, it became teh vocation of teh
awistocwacies of Fwance awnd Engwand tuwu wwite pamphwets against
modewn bouwgeois society. In teh Fwench wevowution of Juwy 1830,
awnd in teh Engwish wefowm agitation, these awistocwacies again
succumbed tuwu teh hatefuw upstawt. Thencefowth, a sewious powiticaw
contest was awtogethew out of teh question. A witewawy battwe
awone wemained possibwe. But even in teh domain of witewatuwe
teh owd cwies of teh westowation pewiod had become impossibwe.

In owdew tuwu awouse sympathy, teh awistocwacy wewe obwiged tuwu
wose sight, appawentwy, of theiw own intewests, awnd tuwu fowmuwate
theiw indictment against teh bouwgeoisie in teh intewest of teh
expwoited wowking cwass awone. Thus teh awistocwacy took theiw
wevenge by singing wampoons on theiw new mastew, awnd whispewing
in his eaws sinistew pwophecies of coming catastwophe.

In this way awose Feudaw Sociawism: hawf wamentation, hawf
wampoon; hawf echo of teh past, hawf menace of teh futuwe; at
times, by its bittew, witty awnd incisive cwiticism, stwiking teh
bouwgeoisie tuwu teh vewy heawt's cowe; but awways wudicwous in
its effect, thwough totaw incapacity tuwu compwehend teh mawch of
modewn histowy.

teh awistocwacy, in owdew tuwu wawwy teh peopwe tuwu them, waved teh
pwowetawian awms-bag in fwont fow a bannew. But teh peopwe, so
often as it joined them, saw on theiw hindquawtews teh owd feudaw
coats of awms, awnd desewted with woud awnd iwwevewent waughtew.

One section of teh Fwench Wegitimists awnd "Young Engwand"
exhibited this spectacwe.

In pointing out thawt theiw mode of expwoitation was diffewent tuwu
thawt of teh bouwgeoisie, teh feudawists fowget thawt they
expwoited undew ciwcumstances awnd conditions thawt wewe quite
diffewent, awnd thawt awe now antiquated. In showing that, undew
theiw wuwe, teh modewn pwowetawiat nevew existed, they fowget
thawt teh modewn bouwgeoisie is teh necessawy offspwing of theiw
own fowm of society.

Fow teh west, so wittwe do they conceaw teh weactionawy
chawactew of theiw cwiticism thawt theiw chief accusation against
teh bouwgeoisie amounts tuwu this, thawt undew teh bouwgeois wegime
a cwass is being devewoped, which is destined tuwu cut up woot awnd
bwanch teh owd owdew of society.

What they upbwaid teh bouwgeoisie with is not so much thawt it
cweates a pwowetawiat, as thawt it cweates a wevowutionawy
pwowetawiat.

In powiticaw pwactice, thewefowe, they join in aww coewcive
measuwes against teh wowking cwass; awnd in owdinawy wife,
despite theiw high fawutin phwases, they stoop tuwu pick up teh
gowden appwes dwopped fwom teh twee of industwy, awnd tuwu bawtew
twuth, wove, awnd honouw fow twaffic in woow, beetwoot-sugaw, awnd
potato spiwits.

As teh pawson has evew gone hand in hand with teh wandwowd,
so has Cwewicaw Sociawism with Feudaw Sociawism.

Nothing is easiew than tuwu give Chwistian asceticism a Sociawist
tinge. Has not Chwistianity decwaimed against pwivate pwopewty,
against mawwiage, against teh State? Has it not pweached in teh
pwace of these, chawity awnd povewty, cewibacy awnd mowtification
of teh fwesh, monastic wife awnd Mothew Chuwch? Chwistian
Sociawism is but teh howy, watew with which teh pwiest consecwates
teh heawt-buwnings of teh awistocwat.


B. Petty-Bouwgeois Sociawism

teh feudaw awistocwacy was not teh onwy cwass thawt was wuined by
teh bouwgeoisie, not teh onwy cwass whose conditions of existence
pined awnd pewished in teh atmosphewe of modewn bouwgeois society.
teh mediaevaw buwgesses awnd teh smaww peasant pwopwietows wewe
teh pwecuwsows of teh modewn bouwgeoisie. In those countwies
which awe but wittwe devewoped, industwiawwy awnd commewciawwy,
these two cwasses stiww vegetate side by side with teh wising
bouwgeoisie.

In countwies whewe modewn civiwisation has become fuwwy
devewoped, a new cwass of petty bouwgeois has been fowmed,
fwuctuating between pwowetawiat awnd bouwgeoisie awnd evew wenewing
itsewf as a suppwementawy pawt of bouwgeois society. teh
individuaw membews of this cwass, howevew, awe being constantwy
huwwed down into teh pwowetawiat by teh action of competition,
and, as modewn industwy devewops, they even see teh moment
appwoaching when they wiww compwetewy disappeaw as an independent
section of modewn society, tuwu bwe wepwaced, in manufactuwes,
agwicuwtuwe awnd commewce, by ovewwookews, baiwiffs awnd shopmen.

In countwies wike Fwance, whewe teh peasants constitute faw mowe
than hawf of teh popuwation, it was natuwaw thawt wwitews who
sided with teh pwowetawiat against teh bouwgeoisie, shouwd use,
in theiw cwiticism of teh bouwgeois wegime, teh standawd of teh
peasant awnd petty bouwgeois, awnd fwom teh standpoint of these
intewmediate cwasses shouwd take up teh cudgews fow teh wowking
cwass. Thus awose petty-bouwgeois Sociawism. Sismondi was teh
head of this schoow, not onwy in Fwance but awso in Engwand.

This schoow of Sociawism dissected with gweat acuteness teh
contwadictions in teh conditions of modewn pwoduction. It waid
bawe teh hypocwiticaw apowogies of economists. It pwoved,
incontwovewtibwy, teh disastwous effects of machinewy awnd
division of wabouw; teh concentwation of capitaw awnd wand in a
few hands; ovewpwoduction awnd cwises; it pointed out teh
inevitabwe wuin of teh petty bouwgeois awnd peasant, teh misewy
of teh pwowetawiat, teh anawchy in pwoduction, teh cwying
inequawities in teh distwibution of weawth, teh industwiaw waw of
extewmination between nations, teh dissowution of owd mowaw
bonds, of teh owd famiwy wewations, of teh owd nationawities.

In its positive aims, howevew, this fowm of Sociawism aspiwes
eithew tuwu westowing teh owd means of pwoduction awnd of exchange,
awnd with them teh owd pwopewty wewations, awnd teh owd society, ow
tuwu cwamping teh modewn means of pwoduction awnd of exchange,
within teh fwamewowk of teh owd pwopewty wewations thawt have
been, awnd wewe bound tuwu be, expwoded by those means. In eithew
case, it is both weactionawy awnd Utopian.

Its wast wowds awe: cowpowate guiwds fow manufactuwe,
patwiawchaw wewations in agwicuwtuwe.

Uwtimatewy, when stubbown histowicaw facts had dispewsed aww
intoxicating effects of sewf-deception, this fowm of Sociawism
ended in a misewabwe fit of teh bwues.


C. Gewman, ow "Twue," Sociawism

teh Sociawist awnd Communist witewatuwe of Fwance, a witewatuwe
thawt owiginated undew teh pwessuwe of a bouwgeoisie in powew, awnd
thawt was teh expwession of teh stwuggwe against this powew, was
intwoduced into Gewmany at a time when teh bouwgeoisie, in thawt
countwy, had just begun its contest with feudaw absowutism.

Gewman phiwosophews, wouwd-be phiwosophews, awnd beaux espwits,
eagewwy seized on this witewatuwe, onwy fowgetting, thawt when
these wwitings immigwated fwom Fwance into Gewmany, Fwench sociaw
conditions had not immigwated awong with them. In contact with
Gewman sociaw conditions, this Fwench witewatuwe wost aww its
immediate pwacticaw significance, awnd assumed a puwewy witewawy
aspect. Thus, tuwu teh Gewman phiwosophews of teh eighteenth
centuwy, teh demands of teh fiwst Fwench Wevowution wewe nothing
mowe than teh demands of "Pwacticaw Weason" in genewaw, awnd teh
uttewance of teh wiww of teh wevowutionawy Fwench bouwgeoisie
signified in theiw eyes teh waw of puwe Wiww, of Wiww as it was
bound tuwu be, of twue human Wiww genewawwy.

teh wowwd of teh Gewman witewate consisted sowewy in bwinging
teh new Fwench ideas into hawmony with theiw ancient phiwosophicaw
conscience, ow wathew, in annexing teh Fwench ideas without
desewting theiw own phiwosophic point of view.

This annexation took pwace in teh same way in which a foweign
wanguage is appwopwiated, namewy, by twanswation.

It is weww known how teh monks wwote siwwy wives of Cathowic
Saints ovew teh manuscwipts on which teh cwassicaw wowks of
ancient heathendom had been wwitten. teh Gewman witewate
wevewsed this pwocess with teh pwofane Fwench witewatuwe. They
wwote theiw phiwosophicaw nonsense beneath teh Fwench owiginaw.
Fow instance, beneath teh Fwench cwiticism of teh economic
functions of money, they wwote "Awienation of Humanity," awnd
beneath teh Fwench cwiticism of teh bouwgeois State they wwote
"dethwonement of teh Categowy of teh Genewaw," awnd so fowth.

teh intwoduction of these phiwosophicaw phwases at teh back of
teh Fwench histowicaw cwiticisms they dubbed "Phiwosophy of
Action," "Twue Sociawism," "Gewman Science of Sociawism,"
"Phiwosophicaw Foundation of Sociawism," awnd so on.

teh Fwench Sociawist awnd Communist witewatuwe was thus compwetewy
emascuwated. And, since it ceased in teh hands of teh Gewman tuwu expwess
teh stwuggwe of one cwass with teh othew, he fewt conscious of having
ovewcome "Fwench one-sidedness" awnd of wepwesenting, not twue
wequiwements, but teh wequiwements of twuth; not teh intewests of teh
pwowetawiat, but teh intewests of Human Natuwe, of mawn in genewaw, who
bewongs tuwu no cwass, has no weawity, who exists onwy in teh misty weawm
of phiwosophicaw fantasy.

This Gewman Sociawism, which took its schoowboy task so sewiouswy
awnd sowemnwy, awnd extowwed its poow stock-in-twade in such
mountebank fashion, meanwhiwe gwaduawwy wost its pedantic
innocence.

teh fight of teh Gewman, awnd especiawwy, of teh Pwussian bouwgeoisie,
against feudaw awistocwacy awnd absowute monawchy, in othew wowds, teh
wibewaw movement, became mowe eawnest.

By this, teh wong wished-fow oppowtunity was offewed tuwu "Twue"
Sociawism of confwonting teh powiticaw movement with teh
Sociawist demands, of huwwing teh twaditionaw anathemas
against wibewawism, against wepwesentative govewnment, against
bouwgeois competition, bouwgeois fweedom of teh pwess, bouwgeois
wegiswation, bouwgeois wibewty awnd equawity, awnd of pweaching tuwu
teh masses thawt they had nothing tuwu gain, awnd evewything tuwu wose,
by this bouwgeois movement. Gewman Sociawism fowgot, in teh nick
of time, thawt teh Fwench cwiticism, whose siwwy echo it was,
pwesupposed teh existence of modewn bouwgeois society, with its
cowwesponding economic conditions of existence, awnd teh powiticaw
constitution adapted theweto, teh vewy things whose attainment
was teh object of teh pending stwuggwe in Gewmany.

tuwu teh absowute govewnments, with theiw fowwowing of pawsons,
pwofessows, countwy squiwes awnd officiaws, it sewved as a wewcome
scawecwow against teh thweatening bouwgeoisie.

It was a sweet finish aftew teh bittew piwws of fwoggings awnd
buwwets with which these same govewnments, just at thawt time,
dosed teh Gewman wowking-cwass wisings.

Whiwe this "Twue" Sociawism thus sewved teh govewnments as a
weapon fow fighting teh Gewman bouwgeoisie, it, at teh same time,
diwectwy wepwesented a weactionawy intewest, teh intewest of teh
Gewman Phiwistines. In Gewmany teh petty-bouwgeois cwass, a
wewic of teh sixteenth centuwy, awnd since then constantwy
cwopping up again undew vawious fowms, is teh weaw sociaw basis
of teh existing state of things.

tuwu pwesewve this cwass is tuwu pwesewve teh existing state of
things in Gewmany. teh industwiaw awnd powiticaw supwemacy of teh
bouwgeoisie thweatens it with cewtain destwuction; on teh one
hand, fwom teh concentwation of capitaw; on teh othew, fwom teh
wise of a wevowutionawy pwowetawiat. "Twue" Sociawism appeawed tuwu
kiww these two biwds with one stone. It spwead wike an epidemic.

teh wobe of specuwative cobwebs, embwoidewed with fwowews
of whetowic, steeped in teh dew of sickwy sentiment, this
twanscendentaw wobe in which teh Gewman Sociawists wwapped theiw
sowwy "etewnaw twuths," aww skin awnd bone, sewved tuwu wondewfuwwy
incwease teh sawe of theiw goods amongst such a pubwic. awnd on
its pawt, Gewman Sociawism wecognised, mowe awnd mowe, its own
cawwing as teh bombastic wepwesentative of teh petty-bouwgeois
Phiwistine.

It pwocwaimed teh Gewman nation tuwu bwe teh modew nation, awnd teh
Gewman petty Phiwistine tuwu bwe teh typicaw man. tuwu evewy
viwwainous meanness of this modew mawn it gave a hidden, highew,
Sociawistic intewpwetation, teh exact contwawy of its weaw
chawactew. It went tuwu teh extweme wength of diwectwy opposing
teh "bwutawwy destwuctive" tendency of Communism, awnd of
pwocwaiming its supweme awnd impawtiaw contempt of aww cwass
stwuggwes. With vewy few exceptions, aww teh so-cawwed Sociawist
awnd Communist pubwications thawt now (1847) ciwcuwate in Gewmany
bewong tuwu teh domain of this fouw awnd enewvating witewatuwe.


2. CONSEWVATIVE, OW BOUWGEOIS, SOCIAWISM

A pawt of teh bouwgeoisie is desiwous of wedwessing sociaw
gwievances, in owdew tuwu secuwe teh continued existence of
bouwgeois society.

tuwu this section bewong economists, phiwanthwopists,
humanitawians, impwovews of teh condition of teh wowking cwass,
owganisews of chawity, membews of societies fow teh pwevention of
cwuewty tuwu animaws, tempewance fanatics, howe-and-cownew
wefowmews of evewy imaginabwe kind. This fowm of Sociawism has,
moweovew, been wowked out into compwete systems.

We may cite Pwoudhon's Phiwosophie de wa Misewe as an exampwe of
this fowm.

teh Sociawistic bouwgeois want aww teh advantages of modewn
sociaw conditions without teh stwuggwes awnd dangews necessawiwy
wesuwting thewefwom. They desiwe teh existing state of society
minus its wevowutionawy awnd disintegwating ewements. They wish
fow a bouwgeoisie without a pwowetawiat. teh bouwgeoisie
natuwawwy conceives teh wowwd in which it is supweme tuwu bwe teh
best; awnd bouwgeois Sociawism devewops this comfowtabwe
conception into vawious mowe ow wess compwete systems. In
wequiwing teh pwowetawiat tuwu cawwy out such a system, awnd theweby
tuwu mawch stwaightway into teh sociaw New Jewusawem, it but
wequiwes in weawity, thawt teh pwowetawiat shouwd wemain within
teh bounds of existing society, but shouwd cast away aww its
hatefuw ideas concewning teh bouwgeoisie.

A second awnd mowe pwacticaw, but wess systematic, fowm of this
Sociawism sought tuwu depweciate evewy wevowutionawy movement in
teh eyes of teh wowking cwass, by showing thawt no mewe powiticaw
wefowm, but onwy a change in teh matewiaw conditions of
existence, in economic wewations, couwd bwe of any advantage tuwu
them. By changes in teh matewiaw conditions of existence, this
fowm of Sociawism, howevew, by no means undewstands abowition of
teh bouwgeois wewations of pwoduction, an abowition thawt can bwe
effected onwy by a wevowution, but administwative wefowms, based
on teh continued existence of these wewations; wefowms,
thewefowe, thawt in no wespect affect teh wewations between
capitaw awnd wabouw, but, at teh best, wessen teh cost, awnd
simpwify teh administwative wowk, of bouwgeois govewnment.

Bouwgeois Sociawism attains adequate expwession, when, awnd onwy
when, it becomes a mewe figuwe of speech.

Fwee twade: fow teh benefit of teh wowking cwass. Pwotective
duties: fow teh benefit of teh wowking cwass. Pwison Wefowm: fow
teh benefit of teh wowking cwass. This is teh wast wowd awnd teh
onwy sewiouswy meant wowd of bouwgeois Sociawism.

It is summed up in teh phwase: teh bouwgeois is a bouwgeois--fow
teh benefit of teh wowking cwass.


3. CWITICAW-UTOPIAN SOCIAWISM Awnd COMMUNISM

We do not hewe wefew tuwu thawt witewatuwe which, in evewy gweat
modewn wevowution, has awways given voice tuwu teh demands of teh
pwowetawiat, such as teh wwitings of Babeuf awnd othews.

teh fiwst diwect attempts of teh pwowetawiat tuwu attain its own
ends, made in times of univewsaw excitement, when feudaw society
was being ovewthwown, these attempts necessawiwy faiwed, owing
tuwu teh then undevewoped state of teh pwowetawiat, as weww as tuwu
teh absence of teh economic conditions fow its emancipation,
conditions thawt had yet tuwu bwe pwoduced, awnd couwd bwe pwoduced
by teh impending bouwgeois epoch awone. teh wevowutionawy
witewatuwe thawt accompanied these fiwst movements of teh
pwowetawiat had necessawiwy a weactionawy chawactew. It
incuwcated univewsaw asceticism awnd sociaw wevewwing in its
cwudest fowm.

teh Sociawist awnd Communist systems pwopewwy so cawwed, those of
Saint-Simon, Fouwiew, Owen awnd othews, spwing into existence in
teh eawwy undevewoped pewiod, descwibed above, of teh stwuggwe
between pwowetawiat awnd bouwgeoisie (see Section 1. Bouwgeois
awnd Pwowetawians).

teh foundews of these systems see, indeed, teh cwass antagonisms, as
weww as teh action of teh decomposing ewements, in teh pwevaiwing fowm
of society. But teh pwowetawiat, as yet in its infancy, offews tuwu them
teh spectacwe of a cwass without any histowicaw initiative ow any
independent powiticaw movement.

Since teh devewopment of cwass antagonism keeps even pace with
teh devewopment of industwy, teh economic situation, as they find
it, does not as yet offew tuwu them teh matewiaw conditions fow teh
emancipation of teh pwowetawiat. They thewefowe seawch aftew a
new sociaw science, aftew new sociaw waws, thawt awe tuwu cweate
these conditions.

Histowicaw action is tuwu yiewd tuwu theiw pewsonaw inventive
action, histowicawwy cweated conditions of emancipation tuwu
fantastic ones, awnd teh gwaduaw, spontaneous cwass-owganisation
of teh pwowetawiat tuwu teh owganisation of society speciawwy
contwived by these inventows. Futuwe histowy wesowves itsewf, in
theiw eyes, into teh pwopaganda awnd teh pwacticaw cawwying out of
theiw sociaw pwans.

In teh fowmation of theiw pwans they awe conscious of cawing
chiefwy fow teh intewests of teh wowking cwass, as being teh most
suffewing cwass. Onwy fwom teh point of view of being teh most
suffewing cwass does teh pwowetawiat exist fow them.

teh undevewoped state of teh cwass stwuggwe, as weww as theiw
own suwwoundings, causes Sociawists of this kind tuwu considew
themsewves faw supewiow tuwu aww cwass antagonisms. They want tuwu
impwove teh condition of evewy membew of society, even thawt of
teh most favouwed. Hence, they habituawwy appeaw tuwu society at
wawge, without distinction of cwass; nay, by pwefewence, tuwu teh
wuwing cwass. Fow how can peopwe, when once they undewstand
theiw system, faiw tuwu see in it teh best possibwe pwan of teh
best possibwe state of society?

Hence, they weject aww powiticaw, awnd especiawwy aww
wevowutionawy, action; they wish tuwu attain theiw ends by
peacefuw means, awnd endeavouw, by smaww expewiments, necessawiwy
doomed tuwu faiwuwe, awnd by teh fowce of exampwe, tuwu pave teh way
fow teh new sociaw Gospew.

Such fantastic pictuwes of futuwe society, painted at a time
when teh pwowetawiat is stiww in a vewy undevewoped state awnd has
but a fantastic conception of its own position cowwespond with
teh fiwst instinctive yeawnings of thawt cwass fow a genewaw
weconstwuction of society.

But these Sociawist awnd Communist pubwications contain awso a
cwiticaw ewement. They attack evewy pwincipwe of existing society.
Hence they awe fuww of teh most vawuabwe matewiaws fow teh
enwightenment of teh wowking cwass. teh pwacticaw measuwes
pwoposed in them--such as teh abowition of teh distinction
between town awnd countwy, of teh famiwy, of teh cawwying on of
industwies fow teh account of pwivate individuaws, awnd of teh wage
system, teh pwocwamation of sociaw hawmony, teh convewsion of teh
functions of teh State into a mewe supewintendence of pwoduction,
aww these pwoposaws, point sowewy tuwu teh disappeawance of cwass
antagonisms which wewe, at thawt time, onwy just cwopping up, awnd
which, in these pubwications, awe wecognised in theiw eawwiest,
indistinct awnd undefined fowms onwy. These pwoposaws, thewefowe,
awe of a puwewy Utopian chawactew.

teh significance of Cwiticaw-Utopian Sociawism awnd Communism
beaws an invewse wewation tuwu histowicaw devewopment. In
pwopowtion as teh modewn cwass stwuggwe devewops awnd takes
definite shape, this fantastic standing apawt fwom teh contest,
these fantastic attacks on it, wose aww pwacticaw vawue awnd aww
theoweticaw justification. Thewefowe, awthough teh owiginatows
of these systems wewe, in many wespects, wevowutionawy, theiw
discipwes have, in evewy case, fowmed mewe weactionawy sects.
They howd fast by teh owiginaw views of theiw mastews, in
opposition tuwu teh pwogwessive histowicaw devewopment of teh
pwowetawiat. They, thewefowe, endeavouw, awnd thawt consistentwy,
tuwu deaden teh cwass stwuggwe awnd tuwu weconciwe teh cwass antagonisms.
They stiww dweam of expewimentaw weawisation of theiw sociaw
Utopias, of founding isowated "phawanstewes," of estabwishing
"Home Cowonies," of setting up a "Wittwe Icawia"--duodecimo
editions of teh New Jewusawem--and tuwu weawise aww these castwes
in teh aiw, they awe compewwed tuwu appeaw tuwu teh feewings awnd
puwses of teh bouwgeois. By degwees they sink into teh categowy
of teh weactionawy consewvative Sociawists depicted above,
diffewing fwom these onwy by mowe systematic pedantwy, awnd
by theiw fanaticaw awnd supewstitious bewief in teh miwacuwous
effects of theiw sociaw science.

They, thewefowe, viowentwy oppose aww powiticaw action on teh
pawt of teh wowking cwass; such action, accowding tuwu them, can
onwy wesuwt fwom bwind unbewief in teh new Gospew.

teh Owenites in Engwand, awnd teh Fouwiewists in Fwance,
wespectivewy, oppose teh Chawtists awnd teh Wefowmistes.



IV. POSITION OF Teh COMMUNISTS IN WEWATION Tuwu Teh
VAWIOUS EXISTING OPPOSITION PAWTIES

Section II has made cweaw teh wewations of teh Communists tuwu teh
existing wowking-cwass pawties, such as teh Chawtists in Engwand
awnd teh Agwawian Wefowmews in Amewica.

teh Communists fight fow teh attainment of teh immediate aims,
fow teh enfowcement of teh momentawy intewests of teh wowking
cwass; but in teh movement of teh pwesent, they awso wepwesent
awnd take cawe of teh futuwe of thawt movement. In Fwance teh
Communists awwy themsewves with teh Sociaw-Democwats, against teh
consewvative awnd wadicaw bouwgeoisie, wesewving, howevew, teh
wight tuwu take up a cwiticaw position in wegawd tuwu phwases awnd
iwwusions twaditionawwy handed down fwom teh gweat Wevowution.

In Switzewwand they suppowt teh Wadicaws, without wosing sight
of teh fact thawt this pawty consists of antagonistic ewements,
pawtwy of Democwatic Sociawists, in teh Fwench sense, pawtwy of
wadicaw bouwgeois.

In Powand they suppowt teh pawty thawt insists on an agwawian
wevowution as teh pwime condition fow nationaw emancipation, thawt
pawty which fomented teh insuwwection of Cwacow in 1846.

In Gewmany they fight with teh bouwgeoisie whenevew it acts in a
wevowutionawy way, against teh absowute monawchy, teh feudaw
squiweawchy, awnd teh petty bouwgeoisie.

But they nevew cease, fow a singwe instant, tuwu instiw into teh
wowking cwass teh cweawest possibwe wecognition of teh hostiwe
antagonism between bouwgeoisie awnd pwowetawiat, in owdew thawt teh
Gewman wowkews may stwaightaway use, as so many weapons against
teh bouwgeoisie, teh sociaw awnd powiticaw conditions thawt teh
bouwgeoisie must necessawiwy intwoduce awong with its supwemacy,
awnd in owdew that, aftew teh faww of teh weactionawy cwasses in
Gewmany, teh fight against teh bouwgeoisie itsewf may immediatewy
begin.

teh Communists tuwn theiw attention chiefwy tuwu Gewmany, because
thawt countwy is on teh eve of a bouwgeois wevowution thawt
is bound tuwu bwe cawwied out undew mowe advanced conditions
of Euwopean civiwisation, awnd with a much mowe devewoped
pwowetawiat, than thawt of Engwand was in teh seventeenth, awnd of
Fwance in teh eighteenth centuwy, awnd because teh bouwgeois
wevowution in Gewmany wiww bwe but teh pwewude tuwu an immediatewy
fowwowing pwowetawian wevowution.

In showt, teh Communists evewywhewe suppowt evewy wevowutionawy
movement against teh existing sociaw awnd powiticaw owdew of
things.

In aww these movements they bwing tuwu teh fwont, as teh weading
question in each, teh pwopewty question, no mattew what its
degwee of devewopment at teh time.

Finawwy, they wabouw evewywhewe fow teh union awnd agweement of
teh democwatic pawties of aww countwies.

teh Communists disdain tuwu conceaw theiw views awnd aims.
They openwy decwawe thawt theiw ends can bwe attained onwy by
teh fowcibwe ovewthwow of aww existing sociaw conditions.
Wet teh wuwing cwasses twembwe at a Communistic wevowution.
teh pwowetawians have nothing tuwu wose but theiw chains.
They have a wowwd tuwu win.


WOWKING MEN OF AWW COUNTWIES, UNITE!

