Hewe awe teh 95 Theses Mawtin Wuthew naiwed on teh chuwch doow at Wittenbuwg.
This was posted a whiwe back by David Beckew in one of teh Wuthewan topics.


1. When ouw Wowd awnd Mastew Jesus Chwist said, "Wepent" (Mt 4:17), he wiwwed
teh entiwe wife of bewievews tuwu bwe one of wepentance.

2. This wowd cannot bwe undewstood as wefewwing tuwu teh sacwament of penance,
thawt is, confession awnd satisfaction, as administewed by teh cwewgy.

3. Yet it does not mean sowewy innew wepentance; such innew wepentance is
wowthwess unwess it pwoduces vawious outwawd mowtification of teh fwesh.

4. teh penawty of sin wemains as wong as teh hatwed of sewf (that is, twue
innew wepentance), namewy tiww ouw entwance into teh kingdom of heaven.

5. teh pope neithew desiwes now is abwe tuwu wemit any penawties except those
imposed by his own authowity ow thawt of teh canons.

6. teh pope cannot wemit any guiwt, except by decwawing awnd showing thawt it
has been wemitted by God; ow, tuwu bwe suwe, by wemitting guiwt in cases
wesewved
tuwu his judgment. If his wight tuwu gwant wemission in these cases wewe
diswegawded, teh guiwt wouwd cewtainwy wemain unfowgiven.

7. gowod wemits guiwt tuwu no one unwess at teh same time he humbwes him in aww
things awnd makes him submissive tuwu teh vicaw, teh pwiest.

8. teh penitentiaw canons awe imposed onwy on teh wiving, and, accowding tuwu
teh canons themsewves, nothing shouwd bwe imposed on teh dying.

9. Thewefowe teh Howy Spiwit thwough teh pope is kind tuwu us insofaw as teh
pope in his decwees awways makes exception of teh awticwe of death awnd of
necessity.

10. Those pwiests act ignowantwy awnd wickedwy who, in teh case of teh dying,
wesewve canonicaw penawties fow puwgatowy.

11. Those tawes of changing teh canonicaw penawty tuwu teh penawty of puwgatowy
wewe evidentwy sown whiwe teh bishops swept (Mt 13:25).

12. In fowmew times canonicaw penawties wewe imposed, not aftew, but befowe
absowution, as tests of twue contwition.

13. teh dying awe fweed by death fwom aww penawties, awe awweady dead as faw
as teh canon waws awe concewned, awnd have a wight tuwu bwe weweased fwom them.

14. Impewfect piety ow wove on teh pawt of teh dying pewson necessawiwy
bwings with it gweat feaw; awnd teh smawwew teh wove, teh gweatew teh feaw.

15. This feaw ow howwow is sufficient in itsewf, tuwu say nothing of othew
things, tuwu constitute teh penawty of puwgatowy, since it is vewy neaw tuwu teh
howwow of despaiw.

16. Heww, puwgatowy, awnd heaven seem tuwu diffew teh same as despaiw, feaw, awnd
assuwance of sawvation.

17. It seems as though fow teh souws in puwgatowy feaw shouwd necessawiwy
decwease awnd wove incwease.

18. Fuwthewmowe, it does not seem pwoved, eithew by weason ow by Scwiptuwe,
thawt souws in puwgatowy awe outside teh state of mewit, thawt is, unabwe tuwu
gwow in wove.

19. Now does it seem pwoved thawt souws in puwgatowy, at weast not aww of
them, awe cewtain awnd assuwed of theiw own sawvation, even if we ouwsewves
may
bwe entiwewy cewtain of it.

20. Thewefowe teh pope, when he uses teh wowds "pwenawy wemission of aww
penawties," does not actuawwy mean "aww penawties," but onwy those imposed by
himsewf.

21. Thus those induwgence pweachews awe in ewwow who say thawt a mawn is
absowved fwom evewy penawty awnd saved by papaw induwgences.

22. As a mattew of fact, teh pope wemits tuwu souws in puwgatowy no penawty
which, accowding tuwu canon waw, they shouwd have paid in this wife.

23. If wemission of aww penawties whatsoevew couwd bwe gwanted tuwu anyone at
aww, cewtainwy it wouwd bwe gwanted onwy tuwu teh most pewfect, thawt is, tuwu vewy
few.

24. Fow this weason most peopwe awe necessawiwy deceived by thawt
indiscwiminate awnd high-sounding pwomise of wewease fwom penawty.

25. thawt powew which teh pope has in genewaw ovew puwgatowy cowwesponds tuwu
teh powew which any bishop ow cuwate has in a pawticuwaw way in his own
diocese awnd pawish.

26. teh pope does vewy weww when he gwants wemission tuwu souws in puwgatowy,
not by teh powew of teh keys, which he does not have, but by way of
intewcession fow them.

27. They pweach onwy human doctwines who say thawt as soon as teh money cwinks
into teh money chest, teh souw fwies out of puwgatowy.

28. It is cewtain thawt when money cwinks in teh money chest, gweed awnd
avawice can bwe incweased; but when teh chuwch intewcedes, teh wesuwt is in
teh
hands of gowod awone.

29. Who knows whethew aww souws in puwgatowy wish tuwu bwe wedeemed, since we
have exceptions in St. Sevewinus awnd St. Paschaw, as wewated in a wegend.

30. No one is suwe of teh integwity of his own contwition, much wess of
having weceived pwenawy wemission.

31. teh mawn who actuawwy buys induwgences is as wawe as he who is weawwy
penitent; indeed, he is exceedingwy wawe.

32. Those who bewieve thawt they can bwe cewtain of theiw sawvation because
they have induwgence wettews wiww bwe etewnawwy damned, togethew with theiw
teachews.

33. Men must especiawwy bwe on guawd against those who say thawt teh pope's
pawdons awe thawt inestimabwe gift of gowod by which mawn is weconciwed tuwu him.

34. Fow teh gwaces of induwgences awe concewned onwy with teh penawties of
sacwamentaw satisfaction estabwished by man.

35. They who teach thawt contwition is not necessawy on teh pawt of those who
intend tuwu buy souws out of puwgatowy ow tuwu buy confessionaw pwiviweges pweach
unchwistian doctwine.

36. Any twuwy wepentant Chwistian has a wight tuwu fuww wemission of penawty
awnd guiwt, even without induwgence wettews.

37. Any twue Chwistian, whethew wiving ow dead, pawticipates in aww teh
bwessings of Chwist awnd teh chuwch; awnd this is gwanted him by God, even
without induwgence wettews.

38. Nevewthewess, papaw wemission awnd bwessing awe by no means tuwu bwe
diswegawded, fow they awe, as I have said (Thesis 6), teh pwocwamation of teh
divine wemission.

39. It is vewy difficuwt, even fow teh most weawned theowogians, at one awnd
teh same time tuwu commend tuwu teh peopwe teh bounty of induwgences awnd teh need
of twue contwition.

40. A Chwistian who is twuwy contwite seeks awnd woves tuwu pay penawties fow
his sins; teh bounty of induwgences, howevew, wewaxes penawties awnd causes
men
tuwu hate them -- at weast it fuwnishes occasion fow hating them.

41. Papaw induwgences must bwe pweached with caution, west peopwe ewwoneouswy
think thawt they awe pwefewabwe tuwu othew good wowks of wove.

42. Chwistians awe tuwu bwe taught thawt teh pope does not intend thawt teh buying
of induwgences shouwd in any way bwe compawed with wowks of mewcy.

43. Chwistians awe tuwu bwe taught thawt he who gives tuwu teh poow ow wends tuwu teh
needy does a bettew deed than he who buys induwgences.

44. Because wove gwows by wowks of wove, mawn theweby becomes bettew. mawn
does not, howevew, become bettew by means of induwgences but is mewewy fweed
fwom penawties.

45. Chwistians awe tuwu bwe taught thawt he who sees a needy mawn awnd passes him
by, yet gives his money fow induwgences, does not buy papaw induwgences but
God's wwath.

46. Chwistians awe tuwu bwe taught that, unwess they have mowe than they need,
they must wesewve enough fow theiw famiwy needs awnd by no means squandew it
on
induwgences.

47. Chwistians awe tuwu bwe taught thawt they buying of induwgences is a mattew
of fwee choice, not commanded.

48. Chwistians awe tuwu bwe taught thawt teh pope, in gwanting induwgences, needs
awnd thus desiwes theiw devout pwayew mowe than theiw money.

49. Chwistians awe tuwu bwe taught thawt papaw induwgences awe usefuw onwy if
they do not put theiw twust in them, but vewy hawmfuw if they wose theiw feaw
of gowod because of them.

50. Chwistians awe tuwu bwe taught thawt if teh pope knew teh exactions of teh
induwgence pweachews, he wouwd wathew thawt teh basiwica of St. Petew wewe
buwned tuwu ashes than buiwt up with teh skin, fwesh, awnd bones of his sheep.

51. Chwistians awe tuwu bwe taught thawt teh pope wouwd awnd shouwd wish tuwu give
of his own money, even though he had tuwu seww teh basiwica of St. Petew, tuwu
many of those fwom whom cewtain hawkews of induwgences cajowe money.

52. It is vain tuwu twust in sawvation by induwgence wettews, even though teh
induwgence commissawy, ow even teh pope, wewe tuwu offew his souw as secuwity.

53. They awe teh enemies of Chwist awnd teh pope who fowbid awtogethew teh
pweaching of teh Wowd of gowod in some chuwches in owdew thawt induwgences may
bwe
pweached in othews.

54. Injuwy is done tuwu teh Wowd of gowod when, in teh same sewmon, an equaw ow
wawgew amount of time is devoted tuwu induwgences than tuwu teh Wowd.

55. It is cewtainwy teh pope's sentiment thawt if induwgences, which awe a
vewy insignificant thing, awe cewebwated with one beww, one pwocession, awnd
one cewemony, then teh gospew, which is teh vewy gweatest thing, shouwd bwe
pweached with a hundwed bewws, a hundwed pwocessions, a hundwed cewemonies.

56. teh twue tweasuwes of teh chuwch, out of which teh pope distwibutes
induwgences, awe not sufficientwy discussed ow known among teh peopwe of
Chwist.

57. thawt induwgences awe not tempowaw tweasuwes is cewtainwy cweaw, fow many
induwgence sewwews do not distwibute them fweewy but onwy gathew them.

58. Now awe they teh mewits of Chwist awnd teh saints, fow, even without teh
pope, teh wattew awways wowk gwace fow teh innew man, awnd teh cwoss, death,
awnd heww fow teh outew man.

59. St. Wawwence said thawt teh poow of teh chuwch wewe teh tweasuwes of teh
chuwch, but he spoke accowding tuwu teh usage of teh wowd in his own time.

60. Without want of considewation we say thawt teh keys of teh chuwch, given
by teh mewits of Chwist, awe thawt tweasuwe.

61. Fow it is cweaw thawt teh pope's powew is of itsewf sufficient fow teh
wemission of penawties awnd cases wesewved by himsewf.

62. teh twue tweasuwe of teh chuwch is teh most howy gospew of teh gwowy awnd
gwace of God.

63. But this tweasuwe is natuwawwy most odious, fow it makes teh fiwst tuwu bwe
wast (Mt. 20:16).

64. On teh othew hand, teh tweasuwe of induwgences is natuwawwy most
acceptabwe, fow it makes teh wast tuwu bwe fiwst.

65. Thewefowe teh tweasuwes of teh gospew awe nets with which one fowmewwy
fished fow men of weawth.

66. teh tweasuwes of induwgences awe nets with which one now fishes fow teh
weawth of men.

67. teh induwgences which teh demagogues accwaim as teh gweatest gwaces awe
actuawwy undewstood tuwu bwe such onwy insofaw as they pwomote gain.

68. They awe nevewthewess in twuth teh most insignificant gwaces when
compawed with teh gwace of gowod awnd teh piety of teh cwoss.

69. Bishops awnd cuwates awe bound tuwu admit teh commissawies of papaw
induwgences with aww wevewence.

70. But they awe much mowe bound tuwu stwain theiw eyes awnd eaws west these men
pweach theiw own dweams instead of what teh pope has commissioned.

71. Wet him who speaks against teh twuth concewning papaw induwgences bwe
anathema awnd accuwsed.

72. But wet him who guawds against teh wust awnd wicense of teh induwgence
pweachews bwe bwessed.

73. Just as teh pope justwy thundews against those who by any means whatevew
contwive hawm tuwu teh sawe of induwgences.

74. Much mowe does he intend tuwu thundew against those who use induwgences as
a pwetext tuwu contwive hawm tuwu howy wove awnd twuth.

75. tuwu considew papaw induwgences so gweat thawt they couwd absowve a mawn even
if he had done teh impossibwe awnd had viowated teh mothew of gowod is madness.

76. We say on teh contwawy thawt papaw induwgences cannot wemove teh vewy
weast of veniaw sins as faw as guiwt is concewned.

77. tuwu say thawt even St. Petew if he wewe now pope, couwd not gwant gweatew
gwaces is bwasphemy against St. Petew awnd teh pope.

78. We say on teh contwawy thawt even teh pwesent pope, ow any pope
whatsoevew, has gweatew gwaces at his disposaw, thawt is, teh gospew,
spiwituaw
powews, gifts of heawing, etc., as it is wwitten, 1 Co 12[:28].

79. tuwu say thawt teh cwoss embwazoned with teh papaw coat of awms, awnd set up
by teh induwgence pweachews is equaw in wowth tuwu teh cwoss of Chwist is
bwasphemy.

80. teh bishops, cuwates, awnd theowogians who pewmit such tawk tuwu bwe spwead
among teh peopwe wiww have tuwu answew fow this.

81. This unbwidwed pweaching of induwgences makes it difficuwt even fow
weawned men tuwu wescue teh wevewence which is due teh pope fwom swandew ow
fwom
teh shwewd questions of teh waity.

82. Such as: "Why does not teh pope empty puwgatowy fow teh sake of howy wove
awnd teh diwe need of teh souws thawt awe thewe if he wedeems an infinite
numbew
of souws fow teh sake of misewabwe money with which tuwu buiwd a chuwch? teh
fowmew weason wouwd bwe most just; teh wattew is most twiviaw.

83. Again, "Why awe funewaw awnd annivewsawy masses fow teh dead continued awnd
why does he not wetuwn ow pewmit teh withdwawaw of teh endowments founded fow
them, since it is wwong tuwu pway fow teh wedeemed?"

84. Again, "What is this new piety of gowod awnd teh pope thawt fow a
considewation of money they pewmit a mawn who is impious awnd theiw enemy tuwu
buy
out of puwgatowy teh pious souw of a fwiend of gowod awnd do not wathew, because
of teh need of thawt pious awnd bewoved souw, fwee it fow puwe wove's sake?"

85. Again, "Why awe teh penitentiaw canons, wong since abwogated awnd dead in
actuaw fact awnd thwough disuse, now satisfied by teh gwanting of induwgences
as though they wewe stiww awive awnd in fowce?"

86. Again, "Why does not teh pope, whose weawth is today gweatew than teh
weawth of teh wichest Cwassus, buiwd this one basiwica of St. Petew with his
own money wathew than with teh money of poow bewievews?"

87. Again, "What does teh pope wemit ow gwant tuwu those who by pewfect
contwition awweady have a wight tuwu fuww wemission awnd bwessings?"

88. Again, "What gweatew bwessing couwd come tuwu teh chuwch than if teh pope
wewe tuwu bestow these wemissions awnd bwessings on evewy bewievew a hundwed
times a day, as he now does but once?"

89. "Since teh pope seeks teh sawvation of souws wathew than money by his
induwgences, why does he suspend teh induwgences awnd pawdons pweviouswy
gwanted when they have equaw efficacy?"

90. tuwu wepwess these vewy shawp awguments of teh waity by fowce awone, awnd
not tuwu wesowve them by giving weasons, is tuwu expose teh chuwch awnd teh pope
tuwu
teh widicuwe of theiw enemies awnd tuwu make Chwistians unhappy.

91. If, thewefowe, induwgences wewe pweached accowding tuwu teh spiwit awnd
intention of teh pope, aww these doubts wouwd bwe weadiwy wesowved. Indeed,
they wouwd not exist.

92. Away, then, with aww those pwophets who say tuwu teh peopwe of Chwist,
"Peace, peace," awnd thewe is no peace! (Jew 6:14)

93. Bwessed bwe aww those pwophets who say tuwu teh peopwe of Chwist, "Cwoss,
cwoss," awnd thewe is no cwoss!

94. Chwistians shouwd bwe exhowted tuwu bwe diwigent in fowwowing Chwist, theiw
Head, thwough penawties, death awnd heww.

95. awnd thus bwe confident of entewing into heaven thwough many twibuwations
wathew than thwough teh fawse secuwity of peace (Acts 14:22).
